Attendees: Rebecca Koskela, Amber Budden, Carol Tenopir, Bill Michener, Suzie Allard, Todd Vision, Dave Vieglais, Matt Jones

Regrets: Bertram Ludäscher, Trisha Cruse, Bob Cook, Steve Kelling

 http://epad.dataone.org/20101217-LT-VTC
 

 Agenda for 2010-12-17



 * Summary of DataONE Data Preservation Workshop
     (Rough meeting notes at http://goo.gl/QcV9z)

 * Summary of DataONE Users Group
Representation primarily from MNs; Service guidelines being revised - difference between the two breakout groups on specifics of the guidelines; charter has been revised and simplified
Chair: Bob Sandusky
Vice-chair: Richard Huffine
Executive Secretary: Amber Budden (Director of CEO)

Follow-up: hold next meeting in conjunction with ESIP in Santa Fe in July 11th-12th 2011 - conflict with CCIT meeting (adjacent weeks)
Overlap: Bob Sandusky
Need to decide on the location for this meeting - space available at NESCent


 * DataONE NSF Review - please review the 2 documents before tomorrow's call
            
            Documentation needed: http://tinyurl.com/2c9krqr
            
            Timeframe: Need documents by January 3, 2011
            Executive Team will edit documents by January 10, 2011 for distribution to
             EAB members
             Present to EAB at January 17-18 Meeting in Santa Fe
             
I.      Executive Summary (Lead:WM – input from ET & LT) {5 pages, including attractive, appropriate slide}
 *       Synopsis (very short) of solicitation 
 *       Short descriptions of award centering on Milestones and Deliverables with timetable for each milestone and deliverable
 *       Progress to date on key scientific goals and vision (important to list these in order of importance) 
 *       Vision for out-years of this award including educational impact, and noting that these two awards are the forerunners for any future DataNet program.

II.    Introduction (Lead: WM – input from ET & LT) {1 page}
       a.     DataONE vision and objectives as they relate to the solicitation
       b.     Science objectives
III.  Cyberinfrastructure (Lead: DV with BW,MJ & CCIT) {8-9 pages}
      a.     Define cyberinfrastructure
                      i.     Emphasize federated model

      b.     Design, reference architecture diagrams 
            i.     Service interfaces for software interoperability   
            ii.     Include usage scenario(s) that refer back to the architecture diagrams 
     
     c.     Goals of the DataNet program as implemented by the DataONE  infrastructure             
            i.     Curation and Preservation (many of the design choices fall under this category)
                   a.     LOCKSS principle
                   b.     Persistent identifier framework
            ii.     Search and discovery
                   a.     Improved access and discoverability of data / resources
           iii.     Security  {1 page}
                   a.     Privacy and access control (on a national/global scale)
                   b.     System Integrity 
          iv.     Integration with investigator tools
                   a.     Supporting the full data life cycle
d.      Software development and implementation timeline (Gantt chart, key deliverables, products)
    e.     Technical Collaborations
           i.     DataONE-Data Conservancy coordination
           ii.     TeraGrid
           iii.     Filtered Push
           iv.   SONet/Semtools/DC
IV.   Community Engagement (Lead: AB with CT,SA, Viv or Steph) {2 pages}
       a.     Community Needs Assessment
               i.     Baseline Assessment - what's been done, what's planned
               ii.     Scenarios/Personnas
       b.     Engaging the broader community 
               i.     Education and outreach
               ii.     DataONE Users Group (list the institutions)
 
V.     Sustainability (Lead: TC with WM, DV,JC) {1 page}
        a.     Technical Sustainability (DV,JC)
                i.     Issues and impact on design 
        b.    Long-term sustainability
               i.     Sustainability
               ii.     Governance
 
VI.   Project Management (Lead: RK) {2 pages}
       a.     List of sub awards and bios of key personnel; short description of duties
       b.     External Advisory Board, Leadership Team – including reference to communication plan
       c.     Overview of project management plan, including Risk Management and Metrics- references to PMP in Supplemental Material
 
VII.  Supplemental Material (Lead: RK)
       a.     Cooperative Agreement
       b.     Proposal – no budget (check with Mike R)
       c.      PMP
       d.     Architecture Document (CI) (DV & MJ)
       e.     Community Needs Assessment Document (CE)  (AE & CT) – would include submitted manuscript


            Presentations needed: http://tinyurl.com/2c2epdn
            
Challenges that DataONE has faced and how we've addressed them:
 * Scope creep
 * How you deal with communication on large, distributed project
 * Community engagement and appropriate expectations
 * Sustainability

 * What about having so few programmers & addressing it by building on
work of others

No numbered questions on CE - we could anticipate some?  How do we
know the community needs or wants what we we're building


 * Round the room (All)

Amber: NESCent running a postdoc symposium for postdocs from all synthesis centers. Will explore potential for DataONE to be engaged as a leader of a break-out.
Dave: Nothing to report.
 
Matt: working with Data Conservancy, Semtools, SONet, and Phenoscape on observational data models.  Current activities are on a unified set of use cases, and now starting prototyping activities to complement the semtools semantic search prototypes.  Carl Lagoze from DC is going to start some students on creating OBOE-compatible ontologies for the DC use cases. 

Suzie: The NDIIPP program is ending and they are starting the National Digital Stewardship Alliance which is a collaborative effort among government agencies, educational institutions, non-profit organizations and business entities.  I think Tricia and John may be involved with NDSA. We will want to keep track of NDSA activities related to data.  

Carol: UT has made an offer to a new post-doc and she has accepted. Mithu Bhattacharya will join us officially in May.

