Attendees: Amber, John Cobb

Regrets: Rebecca (in the air), Bob Cook, Mike Frame, Bill (in the air), Carol (possible), Suzie (possible), Matt, 

9 am Alaska/ 10 am Pacific/ 11 am Mountain/ noon Central/ 1 pm Eastern

Call in using your telephone.

Dial +1 (510) 201-0302
Access Code: 518-229-416
Audio PIN: Shown after joining the meeting (not neccesary)
Meeting ID: 518-229-416

Will also use the epad: http://epad.dataone.org/20111118-LT-VTC if participants can get to it
 
If you have items to add, let me know
 
Agenda for 2011-11-18
 
1.   CI Status (Vieglais)
2.   EarthCube Charette (Michener - Dave in Bill's absense)
3.   Response to the OSTP RFI (Michener - Dave in Bill's absense)
4.   External Advisory Board Meeting (Michener)
5.   ESA workshop proposals (Amber)
6.   Around the Room


1.   CI Status (Vieglais)


2.   EarthCube Charette (Michener - Dave in Bill's absense)


3.   Response to the OSTP RFI (Michener - Dave in Bill's absense)


4.   External Advisory Board Meeting (Michener)
See email attachment from Bill sent 11/17/11

5.   ESA workshop proposals (Amber)
Deadline Dec 1st. Intend to run sessions similar to last year; wksp for junior scientists on data management and special session on data management planning.  For the workshop we have the option of 4 hrs (am), 5 hrs (pm) or 9 hrs (all day). We were thinking of an afternoon session on Sunday allowing people to travel that morning and still attend.
The special session would be either 1.25 hrs (morning) or 2 hrs (evening, 8-10).  Think morning is preferable.  
Instructors available? Potential for DAAC to underwrite costs of student session?

6.   Around the Room

Mike (from email) - Related to the UA WG - I sent out re-invite to all of our Team Members since we had said in our Charter we had 2 year terms.  We did also discuss at our last meeting if WG members miss more than 2 or 3 meetings in a row, we will not re-up their WG Term.   So, the only remember who I sent a "thank you for supporting and contributing to DataONE note" was to Rebecca Shapely.  

Carol (from email) - Mike gave the U&A WG update. Other update is that the ACRL libraries survey is now live (at last!) and the federal libraries and librarians and data managers surveys are still live with help distributing from LANL librarians, Viv and Lisa Zolley from USGS, and Bonnie Carroll (CENDI).  Also anyone who works in an academic or federal library and would like to distribute the librarians survey please let me know.

Suzie (from email) - Call for Papers: Data-Intensive Collaboration in Science and Engineering Workshop at CSCW 2012, 11 February, 2012 in Seattle, WA
Full details: http://www.dicose.org/

John:
Action Items:
    - follow-up steps with DFC - interetest in interoperability with DataONE
    - follow-up steps with SEAD - intrested in interoperability with DataONE
    - Foloow-up with Phil Blood on XSEDE integration with NSF supercomputing centers
SC11:
    - Tutorial on Monday Afternoon SEAD and DataONE "Big Data means your metadata must work <http://sc11.supercomputing.org/schedule/event_detail.php?evid=tut128>. 60 attendees. several interested questions from the audience. Combined slide deck is at ??? . In addition, we opened an e-pad <http://epad.dataone.org/20111114-SC11-Tutorial-M13-Metadata> during the meeting for participants to give input/feedback during the tutorial. 
    - DataNet and EarthCube Bof Th. afternoon: Rob Pennington, Jennifer Shopf, Reagan Moore, Rebecca Koskela, Beth Plale
    - Vendor brief with Garth Gibson, Brent Welch, and Doug Savchenko (John Cobb and REbecca Koskela attending)
    - Discussion on creation CI interoperaiblity between DataONE and XSEDE

