Attendees: Suzie, Carol, Bill, Bob

Regrets: Dave Vieglais, Mike Frame


NSF Site visit to Knoxville, TN
10 September 2012

Where are the racks? UT Campus -- Stokeley Management Center.
Leave some time for visiting the racks -

Scripps Lab is reserved

Invitation list: (see below)
Agenda:

College of Communication & Information
1345 Circle Park Drive 
 Knoxville, TN 37996-0332
 
 Scripps Convergence Lab on 4th floor
 
 BEW -- from discussion at the CCIT meeting, there is interest in revisiting the metrics.  These were developed more than 3 years ago, and our understanding of what is reasonable.  One particular example is the 5 coordinating nodes goal, which CCIT sees as somethign to change.  Our original goal on this one was to improve the user experience for users outside the US.  We see other ways of achieving that gt goal in ways that don't create the cyberinfrastructure challenges of a full coordinating node hosted by someone outside of DataONE.  

Start at 8:30

Plenary:
 * Introductions (30 minutes for this section)
 * Welcoming remarks from Associate Vice Chancellor for Research (UT), relationship between UT and ORNL
 * Bob Chadduck
 * Review of agenda
 
Cyberinfrastructure (90-120 minutes)
 * Discussion of how ORC works as CN and MN, Bruce 
 * Semantics work, Line
 * ONEMercury, Giri

EVA Update, Bob (30 minutes)

Noon: Lunch (catered)

Sociocultural Update, Suzie and Kimberly (45 minutes)

Usability & Assessment, Carol, Mike Frame  (Intro (30min) - Lab/demo  Mary Beth (60)) - 90 minutes
 * Visit usability lab

S & G Update (Mike Frame, John Cobb)      (30 minutes)


Synergistic activities - Miriam and students (invite UT ScienceLinks, SciData, and DCERC students, all funded by IMLS and work with DataONE projects)  (45-60min)


Summary remarks from Bob Chadduck

Visit to machine room, if desired

Dinner ( 9/10)

NSF
1. Bob Chadduck


ORNL Participants 
1. Line Pouchard
2. John Cobb
3. Bob Cook
4. Giri Palanisamy
5. Bruce Wilson

DataONE Central Office
1. Bill Michener
2. Rebecca Koskela
3. Dave Vieglais(?)

USGS
Mike Frame

UT Participants
1. Miriam Davis
2. Suzie Allard
3. Carol Tenopir
4. Kimberly Douglass
5.Robert Waltz (developer)
6. Ben Birch, GRA
7.Tanner Jessel, GRA
8.Chris Brumgard, GRA/developer/ sys admin
9. Mary Beth West
10. Greg Reed, Associate V-C for Research (morning)
11. Mike Wirth 
12. Ed Cortez

DCERC Students
Kayla Siddell
Erika Johns
Chris Eaker

ScienceLinks Students (6)

SciData Students (8)

