17 April 2012
Attendees: Bill, Rebecca, Amber, Steph, Suzie, Trisha

Motivation:
Many inquiries about becoming a Member Node
2 dozen are Metacat
Mercury MNs (how many?) other NASA facilities? --BEW: no other NASA EOSDIS data centers are using Mercury, for what that's worth, although Mercury has harvested the Land Processes DAAC metadata / links to the LP DAAC's holdings (RC).
Generic Member Nodes (GMN) - how many?

EAB has strongly suggested that DataONE get as many MNs online ASAP  for purposes of longevity

First Principle:
Select MNs for joining DataONE based on number of instantiations

Second Principle
Select MNs based on quantity and quality of data

Third Principle
Select high-profile MNs

Fourth Principle
Select pragmatically  - knowing that there are resources and enthusiasm to complete the tasks

Fifth Principle
Select MNs based on their abilitty to contribute to long-term sustainability

Sixth Principle
Select MNs that are diverse and geographically distributed so that we cover a range of MN types and globally distributed nodes (has implications for need for global CNs)

Seventh Principle
Select based on showing exemplars for what we want DataONE to be.

Winners:

Metacat (24+/-)
Mercury instantiations (?) -- BEW: could look to IABIN, possibly CDIAC, possibly wind energy data @ORNL
Merritt (4) {includes Excel node}
DuraSpace/Fedora - check with MacKenzie Smith (?)
USGS MNs (?)   - where can we look to stay up to date with USGS Member Node candidates?  (deborah at RPI is interested in keeping up as a result of her work on water quality monitoring and general semantically enabled monitoring)
Dataverse out of Harvard for social science data (?) http://thedata.org/
US Global Change Research Program and National Climate Data Centers 
NASA/NOAA/USDA
Smithsonian (Fedora instance with Drupal on top) 
i-Rods
OKFN (Open Knowledge Foundation)
Open DAP
PANGAEA
TERN

http://mule1.dataone.org/OperationDocs/membernodes.html

Also: be sure to maintain differentiation between SW technology (Fedora, iRODS, ...) and projects/repositories.

