Note to accompany Telephone conference

Topic:

Coordinates: 
Tuesday, Oct. 16 13:30 EDT, 12:30 CDT 11:30 MDT 9:30 AKDT
Telephone: 877-416-7592 conf. code 9171592
    (If for some reason a problem with the telcon line emerges, watch the epad location for alternate call-in arrangement)
Etherpad at <http://epad.dataone.org/20121016-XSEDE-suppl-disc>

Invitees
Cobb, John
Cook, Bob
Jones, Matt
Steve Kelling (or Dan Fink or Kevin Webb in his absence
Koskela, Rebecca
Michener, Bill
Silva, Claudio (or Jorge Poco in his absence)
Vieglais, Dave

Attendees:
Cobb, John
Cook, Bob
Jones, Matt
Koskela, Rebecca
Jorge Poco in his absence)
Michener, Bill
Vieglais, Dave

Regrets:
    Claudio Silva
    Steve Kelling

Action Items:
1. Target submission date to submit: End of next week?
2. We need an outline soon with writing assignments (Cobb ASAP)
3.
4.

Dave:
Assuming: Large amounts of data and large amounts of processing - that would be an ideal scope. Batch processing.

Bob: Also have the data come from a member node.

Matt: How much data?
Bob: Several Tb
Jorge: "It is alot of data that we need to process.

Bob:
Last Summer Jorge set up model on a lap top and could run a few years.
We wouldlike to run 
We would like to do 20 years and global land domain at 1/2 degree. WE would like to do more

we are looking at 10-100X effort of a laptop

The workflow was to take information subsets and process

Data is in NetCDF format and available via ftp and/or THREDDS

Matt: That argues for setting up a node within XSEDE.

Q (Matt) Is the dataset static?
A (Bob) The modeling groups are contributing data (up to 10 now) once dat ais contributed, it is stable but we are getting new depositions from new teams.

The projectd we are running this for runs for another 15 months.

Developing the workflow would be beneficial

Matt: How does UVCdat get data now?
A Bob reads NetCDF files.

Jorge: WE were reading from NetCDF but we could implement additional protocols

Matt: It sounds like a similar effort 

Cobb: output? interactive or stored?
A: both

Cobb: What about additional contributions?
A: Bob: 

We are also looking at North America at 1/4 degree.

Ecosystem processes, every month for a time period.
Computation, analytical, numerical models.

Some models give different 
most are looking at carbon, land-cover, and nutrient cycling
There are other infromation.

We do have 5 different scenarios for the globa( and North Amercia)

Bob: So we are looking to develop an EAGR
Bill: Actually we are looing at a supplemental proposal. I would keep it in the couple of hundre K$

Matt: so if we were going to do this,then
1) Setup MN in XSEDE
2) replicate the data into XSEDE-MN
3) Access from within an XSEDE during UVCdata runs

UVCdata funded by DOE
Code repo is at LLNL
pick a verions of UVCdat

Q: What is the Sci Highlinght?
A: Improved understanding of global ecosystem models for data intensive cases.

Matt: Do we want the node to persist?

This is kind of a file management and staging issue.

Matt: a Few TB, but how many files?
A: (Bob) a large number

Data owner is LLNL Dean Williams is open to collaboration

ILAMB issues
modelling
benchmarking (particularly with observational input/valididation)

So there are 2 subtasks
A: developing modelling analysis WF
B: Developing observation data corporation and validation

XSEDE interaction

Dave:
size of persisten storage
persisting 
number of objects

We may stress DataONE metadta traffic if we have a few millions objects.
(but we can adjust granularity)

Dave it would be good to set up a workflow to show the content that can be managed this way.

My concern is that the the DataONe infrastructure might be stress tested.

That could help us 

Agenda:
1. Overview of Supplemental effort to connect DataONE and XSDEDE
    focus on EVA eBird, ILAMB, or both?
2. Boundary conditions
    a. Connect DataONE and XSEDE
    b. Have a finshed result sufficently before the RSV
    c. Hope for a long-term effort hat will esatablish an ongoing effort, hopefully self-sustaining
3. Proposed scope of work
4. Next steps and goals for submission 

Tasks:

set up a XSEDE interface 
    Gateway
    contact
    potential MN "machine"(s)
    build a MN instance
UVCdat
    deposit files
    access files
XSEDE allocation
    data store
    data acess
    
    
Resources:
    Someone like Nick Dexter before. (Need to identify person)
        maybe 1/4 or 1/2 time systems, developer, analyst person to deploy DataONE SW systems
        We may need to adapt XSEDE's data management stack
        
so we need a person who
    understand DataONe
    understand XSEDE
    cna help adapt mistmip effort to working
    
    
David Koop and Jorge were at the DataONe AHM demonstating accessing data via DataONE Api's

Does UVCdat  needs resources.

time critical

typical supplement through fastlane

Target date to submit: End of next week?

We need an outline soon with writing assignments (Cobb ASAP)

