Attendees: Rebecca, Bruce, Mike, Bill, John K, Viv


Regrets: John C., Deborah McGuinness, Amber, Bob, Suzie


DataONE LT Call:  9am AK/10am PT/11am MT/noon CT/1pm ET

 We will also use the epad: http://epad.dataone.org/2013May17-LT-VTC if participants can get to it.
 
If you have items to add, let me know.

1.  Please join my meeting, May 17, 2013 at 11:00 AM MDT.
https://www1.gotomeeting.com/join/686464696

2.  Use your microphone and speakers (VoIP) - a headset is recommended. Or, call in using your telephone.

Dial  1 (630) 869-1013
Access Code: 686-464-696
Audio PIN: Shown after joining the meeting

Meeting ID: 686-464-696

GoToMeeting®
Online Meetings Made Easy®

Agenda for 2013-05-17

1) CI Update (Vieglais)

Pushed out the update to the CN stack - to be able to support the Chinese MN coming online soon. 
DSpace - discussion has started on this; Dave to be hearing from Bob Sandusky and will check to see how the SEAD MN was implemented. 
SEAD has some data packages with tens of thousands of files so are making sure indexing will work.

BEW -- context: UTK is working on evaluating tools for the next generation of an institutional repository. DSpace is one contender, because of the interface out of the box and potential for earlier DataONE integration than Fedora.  


2) CEE Update  (Budden) - not available

No Update

3) Member Node Update (Cobb) - not available

No Update
4) Proposal Planning Workshop (Michener)
Close to meeting alot of the performance metrics - one possible exception is the target for MNs in year 5. Discussion about DSpace plus Member Node Lite (or Slender Nodes).
Brainstorming on where we've been - challenges and opportunities. Then a primer on logic models was presented.
Identified 10 activities in the first round - later expanded to 15 logic models, with resource needs, outputs, outcomes, and impacts. 
Another exercise was to categorize the 15 logic models into High, Medium, and Low. One logic model ended up with unamimous low priority so probably won't be included in the next proposal.
What is the strategic focus for DataONE?  Identified approximately 16 foci - the highest ranked were:

A. Increase mission relevant data content -  1
C. Support data discovery - 2
D. Build community of high-quality data practice - 3
B. Increase science impact (testimonials of users of DataONE) -  4

Ideas of alternative strategies for presenting to NSF possibilities for the next proposal
were generated.

Agreement from the members of the workshop: Emphasis on discovery 

A lot of hard work but the process worked. 

Mike: Discovery? Did discussions occur about Use/Applied/Viz?

5) Around the Room

Bruce: nothing to add beyond the discussion around the planning meeting this week.

John K: nothing to add

Mike: DMP Adminstrative Advisory Board Meeting this past week. Beginning to plan and prioritize requirements for Grant. 

Mike: DOI has established a Climate Science Advisory Board - noted that Berrien is on the group...



