Attendees: Keith Kintigh, Frank McManamon, Adam Brin, Dave Vieglais, Bertram Ludaescher, Rebecca Koskela


1.  Please join my meeting, Feb 4, 2014 at 1:00 PM MST.
https://www1.gotomeeting.com/join/258809625

2.  Use your microphone and speakers (VoIP) - a headset is recommended. Or, call in using your telephone.

Dial  1 (805) 309-0010
Access Code: 258-809-625
Audio PIN: Shown after joining the meeting

Meeting ID: 258-809-625


 
For  introductions:
Keith W. Kintigh, Associate Director & Professor 
School of Human Evolution & Social Change (Anthropology)
Digital Antiquity – tDAR – The Digital Archaeological Record
Frank McManamon, Executive Director of Digital  Antiquity, tDAR’s organizational home Adam Brin, Digital Antiquity’s Technical Director 
Robyn Merchant will be handling the proposal administrative  and financial paperwork and budgets. 

DataONE:
Bertram Ludaescher, CS, UC Davis (UIUC from Fall'14), co-lead of Provenance Working Group  
Dave Vieglais, Director of Development and Operations for DataONE
Rebecca Koskela, Executive Director DataONE

Proposals need to be focusing on a single, doable product  (planning grant) approx $300K-$400K 
(67 proposals submitted first year, 60 next year and will be awarding 15-20 this year)

First proposal is for design and there would be a later proposal for the implementation phase

What data should be combined with tDAR contents as well as data available from DataONE?

tDAR - 
small rodent data (indicative of climate)
archeological remains

Have a grant to pull together the records on animal bones in the northern Southwest -
Kate Speilman
Southwest Pre-history: looking at climate {Peggy Nelson}
Used the Oregon State PRISM data
Regional scale landscape

tDAR has ontologies to support data integration (fauna only?)

Does DataONE have climatic data?

DataONE has a mixture of data types and the content depends on the Member Nodes.

Scope: US Southwest for the past 13,000 years
Precipitation curves, temperature curves
Could sell it as something that could be done for a wider region

Good metadata necessary for discovery, subsetting, etc

Tree ring data from Tucson Tree Ring Laboratory - could possibly be part of this grant -
Bertram will explore an older tree ring database done in Germany.
[Bertram, aside: Just found another tree ring database effort; not sure whether it's useful: http://web.utk.edu/~grissino/itrdb.htm]  

10-20 major data sources:  figure out which ones they are and then try to get them involved
Some of the projects are already in tDAR 
Environmental data - decide what data to deal with: soils, hydrology 

Possible Member Nodes with relevant data:
DAAC, USGS,KNB








