Attendees: Margaret Hedstrom, Bill Michener, Rebecca Koskela

Discussed similar collaborations with DFC - are there also similar collaborations
with SEAD?  For example, would SEAD be a potential MN?

Some future MNs for DataONE are DSpace, Fedora and federal agencies
SEAD is trying to figure out the appropriate repositories for the valuable data. They
are 9 months into the project. Have been working with University of Illinois and their
repository. Announcement yesterday of DuraSpace Incubator supporting VIVO

SEAD: Possibility of just providing the metadata in DataONE?
They are ingesting one repository because it is sunsetting. Haven't found a permanent home for the data yet.

CUAHSI Observational Data Model : the DataONE Semantics Working Group is looking at this
SEAD discussing whether or not to support this in their Active Content Repository (ACR)
How far should they go to provide analysis tools to the community? They do have a mapping from the ODM to the ACR.  This may be another item for collaboration.
(3 different DataNets working with CUAHSI)
**This may be a good case study for the partnership to tackle

SEAD had a post-doc working on this for a couple of months and is an ongoing discussion with the developers; also working with Praveen Kumar

Community Engagement: SEAD doesn't have much in this area because of funding cuts - were advised by NSF to postpone those activities until after the prototype was done

Margaret's idea for RCN: focus on long-term sustainable plans for the DataNets

Propose doing a workshop at SESYNC with the DataNets and the various governmental agencies, European collaborations, etc rather than using RCN funds

Crowd sourcing activities is another area to look at - SEAD: student, post-doc or assistant professor finds relevant data, massage, improve it - way to save the value added data
"social curation" - more focused than crowd sourcing

DataONE adding more MNs
How small can a MN be? 1000 to 500M data products in the existing MNs

How users interact with DataONE?
At tier 1, discover data and then download it
At tier 4, discover data, download it, do something with it and then upload the data product

Bill meeting with archeology community next week - grand challenges in archeology that would be supported by new cyberinfrastructure

Summary:
 * Common interest in DSpace & Fedora MNs
 * Collaboration with CUAHSI (actually 3 DataNets: DFC, DataONE, SEAD)
 * Social curation

