DUG Planning Meeting
Feb 13 2013

Attending:  Andrew, Bill, Amber, Dave, Matt, Rebecca
Regrets:


Call in info:
1.  Please join my meeting, Feb 13, 2013 at 11:00 AM PST.
https://www1.gotomeeting.com/join/836054097

2.  Use your microphone and speakers (VoIP) - a headset is recommended. Or, call in using your telephone.

Dial  1 (267) 507-0012
Access Code: 836-054-097
Audio PIN: Shown after joining the meeting

Meeting ID: 836-054-097

Agenda:
1) Agenda setting for the DUG
 * Meeting to be held Sunday July 7th and Monday July 8th
 * Suggestion of a poster session / reception Sunday night
 * Suggestion of allowing for DUG member presentations
 * Breakouts: Number? Subjects?

Ability for MN to present synopsis of MN - follow the OBFS model: session that allows every station to cover highlights (3 slides).
Meeting the MNs session..

Have a roundatable on the subjects covering the session that DUG were willing to lead (from survey).  30 minutes round tables covering material with subject leaders and then 30 minute discussion.  Have 3-4 of these? - Keep the focus of this on application of DataONE products?  Yes, for some but could have others more broad in scope - e.g. open science.  Ensure intersection with DataONE interests.
 - Open submission of topics, proposal submission? Use people that indicated that they were interested in leading.
Full session activity.

State of DataONE / future activities
Overview, CI and CE

User Group Feedback session.
DMPTool, ONEDrive?, DataONE promo packet, How to become a MN? / MN support - too short to cover technical detail.  Have a newer MN present on their experience of becoming one?  Couple with DataONE e.g. DataONE perspective and MN perspective.  John Cobb's MN forum group.

Poster session: 
Theme: MNs (more details than 3 slides), tools, education initiatives. (As related to DataONE). Open call.


2) Organizational logistics
 * Meeting to be colocated with ESIP at Chapel Hill - http://fridaycenter.unc.edu/fc/index.html
 * Support (space) offered from NESCent
 * How many expected to attend?
 * Capacity needed for breakout rooms?

Friday Center: Conference center with large auditorium and number of smaller rooms.  Sufficient lobby space for posters.
NESCent too far.

Rebecca to look into the Friday Center for the poster session; catering etc
Numbers - more than 50? Less than 100. 75 a good number?
Hotel numbers - room block for 20 (people coming for only DUG and not ESIP)

3 break out groups, 1 in main room and 2 smaller rooms.
Instead of using (400 capacity) auditorium, use one of the smaller rooms - redbud / dogwood.

3) DUG Business meeting/Review of charter
 * Membership requirements
 * Move towards a general membership model with steering group vs current structured model 
In operation we treat it like an open membership but on paper we are more formal.

4) Next steps
Rebecca to work with conference center on rooms  (will request block of meeting rooms that are
close together), etc.
Amber and Andrew to work on charter / DUG guidlelines document for membership
Amber and Andrew to develop an agenda for review by the group
Amber with Rebecca and Chris on registration process (co-ordinate with ESIP)
Amber to look to the survey for Roundtable volunteers and write poster session details.



