Attendees: Amber, Bill, Dave, Richard, Rebecca, Andrew, Trisha

1.  Please join my meeting, Feb 6, 2012 at 1:00 PM PST.
https://www1.gotomeeting.com/join/552945704

2.  Use your microphone and speakers (VoIP) - a headset is
recommended. Or, call in using your telephone.

Dial  1 (636) 277-0135
Access Code: 552-945-704
Audio PIN: Shown after joining the meeting

Meeting ID: 552-945-704

Agenda

1) Discussion with ESIP re planning (Amber / Rebecca)
Registration to go live Mar 15th. 
DataONE to run own registration with links to ESIP page and vice versa
DataONE to take a single hotel with a block of 50 rooms.  No contracts but need end date for block.  Need to estimate numbers for accommodation planning.
Meeting July Sun 15-Mon 16th (full days), due to ESIP starting on Tuesday morning instead of mid-day Tuesday. Reciprocal registration links between the two events. People can sign up for both at the same time. They are running separately. We need our registration to be ready by March 15 including a draft agenda. Logistics include needing to know the numbers we expect.
Requested space for 50 people with 4 breakout rooms holding 20 each. 

2) Structure of meeting - dates, membership requirements etc (Amber / All)
We had 48 at the last meeting, we are supposed to be doubling. 25 - 50 - 100. Is 100 a realistic target? We do not anticipate covering travel costs at this meeting. 100 may be high. 

3) Target audience (DUG Chairs, S&G Chairs)
Year 1 - Member Nodes
Year 2: Scientists and Librarians
Year 3 - Researchers, Data Managers, and Archivists (users of the DMP Tool) - at least a subset of that community fo rthose managing natural science data. Potential Member Nodes.

4) Proposed agenda (DUG Chairs, All)
Lifecycle Management of Natural Science Data (How DataOne Makes Your Life Easier)
1. Planning
2. Data Collection and Description
3. Data manipulation and tools for using data in new ways
4. Publishing and Release of Data
5. Data Re-use and integration - Demonstration of how it has been done?
6. Archiving and Preservation - Dialogue among ong member nodes and users

Other items:
- Survey

Bill and Trish: Marketing plan will be in place. Maybe premature to discuss long-term business model. Definitely want to address member node requirements. Feedback from users is important. Plans for the next year and input on which tools and what classes of member nodes are important to pursue. We could use the DUG input on data governance (attribution, citation format, etc.)

Business Meeting
- Review of charter and membership in the DUG
- Criteria for membership? Endorsement by current members? etc.

5) Member solicitation / invites (Amber, All)
Ecolog
ESIP communiques
CNI mailing list?
DMPTool
Current and interested DUG Members
Potential MN contact (obtain from CCIT)
IDCC mailing list?
AGU? Tool 
DataONE mailing list
DataNET / INTEROP PIs (get mailing list from Data 2012 mailing list)
EarthCube charet group (post on website vs having NSF mailing list)
IDigBio (NSF grant funded project)



