DataONE Users Group
Jul 7th - 8th 2013
Chapel Hill, NC

Breakout 1: Member Nodes

A near final version of the presentation slides is available at 
<https://repository.dataone.org/documents/Committees/MNcoord/Coordination_Work_Area/DUG_2013_prep/20130707_DUG_MN_breakouts.pptx> (But this is probably not the long-term archive location of these slides)

13:00 EDT Notes (1440 session notes below at or around line 208)
Matt - presenting on overview/issues with becoming a MN, DataONE design goals
    embrace heterogeneity via Data Packaging
    perservation
    high availability
    reproducability, immutability, versioning
    logging
    
    some identifiers: doi, ark, uurl, lsid, http, etc.

Web page for Member Node Deployment Checklist
http://mule1.dataone.org/OperationDocs/member_node_deployment/mn_checklist.html


   Packaging model:
   resource map, data, metadata. Note some Member Nodes handling packaging issues different. DataONE exposes this model

Metadata formats (EMl, BDP, ISO 19115, Dublin Core, Darwin Core, METS) - 

See the road Map to a Member Node
Phase 1 - Planning
    includes selecting a tier
        tier 1: public content
        tier 2: access control (make private data available via "login")
        tier 3: write services (users can write data/metadata to your node)
        tier 4: act as a replication target

Q: For a group that is considering being a basic MN (tier 1), is there any guidance on deciding to operate at a higher node?
A: Think organizationally; do you think you'll be an archive for a long time? If not, consider joining another MN, but if are long-term, you might be a good candidate for a MN.
Q: Is there a problem with too many nodes?
A: We anticipate 100s or 1000s of MNs, but there are scalability issues we are considering.
Q: Would you see all research/academic institutions becoming MNs?
A: Yes, we are looking at institutional repositories.
Q: Re: archiving and longevity, what is the relationship with a national archivial repository (seemed to imply long-term NARA approved repository) and DataONE? 
A: link smaller repositories to larger (national?) repositories (i.e. NODC for oceanographic data),

Phase 2 - Develop
    can use existing repository software 
        Metacat (tier 4)
        Generic Member Node (tier 4)
        Dryad (tier 1)
        Mercury (tier 1)
        Merritt (tier 1)
        ... and more
    If you use existing MN software, you can skip the development step; if not, there will be development time needed.
    
Phase 3 - Deploy
    we go through 2 testing stages in deployment:
        1 - staging, iterative cycle;
        2 - deploy in production
        
Phase 4 - Operate
    announce availability of MN
    ongoing maintenance
    
Barriers in the implementation process:
    during deployment - establishing secure SSL environments, providing package ORE maps (required to link data and metadata)
    design issure - immutability and versioning, logging

QUESTIONS/COMMENTS:

Q: what is data citation policy of DataONE?
A: DataONE doesn't have a uniform citation policy other than each dataset is required to have one.  Some MNs impose very strict data citation policies, others do not, and that's fine.
Q: Data citation policies may help to mitigate the issue of appropriate attribution/recognition of source of dataset.
A: This is also related to the "branding" issue discussed in the MN showcase.
    CC0 copyright - you can do anything you want with this data (data provider waives all rights to data including citation)
Q: What is benefit to using CC0?
A: Open and unencumbered access to data for synthesis.  

If you don't have citation, you don't have science - see concepts of provenance and risks of plagiarism, etc.  

Matt: DataONE has tried to remain neutral with respect to data citation policies in order to be able to include more and more MN's. 

Q: How do we address data provenance? through metadata?
A: Yes.  Can also identify derived datasets (composed of more than 1 dataset) and superseded datasets. see the Package Model slide in the presentation - data has system metadata, the resource map has system metadata, and the science metadata has system metadata.  System metadata is maintained by the MN; there is some QA/QC at DataONE.

Q: barriers/impediments specifically logging - say node X implements CILogon, where does the logging occur?
A: CNs log metadata access, and we expect MNs to log access to their data/metadata (This is needed to report replica access for originating MNs)

MN needs simpler implementation, data contributors need to know who's accessing their data - sometimes these conflict

D1 supports CILogon on the back end.

Laura: presenting on documentation and communications needs

SEAD (Inna and Kavitha present at this DUG) may have been the first MN to implement directly from documentation without prior DataONE project interaction/experience.

Missing parts of documentation: the middle part. A link between high-lelve overview and technical details

Question: 
1. What should be seen on the DataONE website regarding MN's

currently we have
what is invovled
..
Current MN's

Other things to add:
- What does it cost to implement a MN?  (answer will interest management)
- What are the costs of maintaining a MN? (answer will interest management)
- Suggestion - do this by scenario - The answers may vary by scenario - i.e. large remote observing program versus a museum
- Considerations: ...
- Will vary by choice of MN SW stack

If do costs, then should also state the benefits
- What are the benefits of deploying a MN? (answer will interest management)

- provide some recommendations/guidance: Doen't just say you support ISO, but add things like if you use ISO, if you choose to put this data field into the schema it will help usability.
    or for example, we suport 5 data formats but if you use these 2 you can have more bang for the buck.
    Matt: we have best practices
    Rebecca: but the best practices are for practiioners and this may or may not be
    
Provide a mentor relationship for new MNs

Advertise the MNF on the ext. DataONE web-page

Improve readability of web-pages

Bob: is there a MN implementor Mailing list.

Laura: means of communication

Q: how to capture content

Document etherpad searchability for the MN documentation.

Redmine: https://redmine.dataone.org/projects/mns

Laura: provisional strategy. link to documentation mid-level directly from the flowchart

Laura: what problems that you experience could have been alleviated by clikcing through the flowchart.

A: Proper links to the system metadata schema.
( I found three pages and a link mentioned but it followed to a missing page)

Comment: the economics is killing us. Can you help us to define funding opportunities that could help us in finding resources for implementation.

Rephrase: after cost question: answer another question: how can I find the resources that will help me meet those costs:

Steve: it may also help if the web pages help make the case of  "Why" this is a valuable activity. This is slightly different than the statement of benefits question, but there is some overlap.

link ask.dataone.org better in external.

Communications questions:
    Questions about modes: how do you use/cna use?
        IRC
        Online doc
        Dev mailing
        CCIT calls
        Redmine https://redmine.dataone.org/projects/mns

Maximinze the MNF. What to do to make it more useful?
    advertise better?
    open more widely? Y
    What to pulish about MNF?
        epad are searchable
        some questions
        
Link epads direclty into the forum. in a web-page
    note: epads are undigested notes
    
provide a link to MN-related questions on ask.dataone.org

Some organizations are open but participation lags. Maybe ask new MNs to comment

More q's
What skills are needed to implement a MN?



John: presenting on DataONE and MN added value

for science researchers, hoe can DATaONE help amplify the science impact of the data archives represented by the MNs?
what can MNs and D1 do to augment synergistic opportunities?
     -    I tried to use D1, was not easy to search for data - consider a  semantic search engine which would allow better discovery of data  (forward to MBW)
     -    related to best practices, before going production, can we get  some guidance on best practices - high priority data, things we can do  now (still in dev/test) where changes are cheaper/easier
what can MNs and D1 do to augment synergistic oppportunities? 
other questions?

How  does D1 help individual researchers deposit data?  ask.dataone.org -  how do I put my data into D1?  response: MNs open to anyone (i.e.  ONEShare), MNs open to anyone with qualifications, MNs that are project  specific (i.e. PISCO and others)

Q:  challenge to create metadata for data - perhaps a template would be  useful, esp. to researchers so they'd have something to start from.  
A: metadata tools to help relatively inexperienced users get started - see Morpho for one.
These  are kind of community data standards/conventions (i.e. use meters vs  centimeters, etc.)  Perhaps D1 can help with pointers to these community  standards (i.e. see Kepler for data flow)

Q: there are no standards - what if, say, units were changed prior to upload
A: 

could leverage some existing tools (i.e. DMPtool) web-based tool for developing a data management plan tool; Smithsonian wants to use DMP version 2 internally

Q: do we see MNs of a like type use like metadata standards?
A: yes

Karl (EDAC) is multi domain, so they see many metadata standards.  What are some common denominators across domains?  

***************************************************************************

Session 4 1440 - 1600

Matt: discussing overview/processes/barriers to implementing MNs

MNs are authoritative, curate data holdings, log/report access to objects, control access to data/metadata, replicate holdings for other MNs, deploy a DataONE-compatible software system

Design goals: embrace hetergeneity via data packaging, preservation, high availability, reproducibility, immutability and versioning, logging

persistent identifiers: uniquely identify data or metadata objects
some examples of identifiers: doi, ark, uuid, lsid, html, etc...

Data Packaging - see architecture documentation
MUST produce a resource map (OAI-ORE RDF) (with system metadata)
data and the science metadata also have system metadata

support many metadata formats, including EML, BDP, ISO 19115, Dublin Core, Darwin Core, METS

See flowchart: Road Map to a Member Node

Phase 1 - Plan
    determine which tier
        tier 1 - public content
        tier 2 - access control 
        tier 3 - write services 
        tier 4 - act as a replication target

Phase 2 - Develop
    wrap your own - implement tier 1 MN APIs however you like or implement tiers 2-4 as you need  - very time consuming
    use existing repository software
        metacat (tier 4)
        generic member node (tier 4) 
        dryad (tier 1)
        mercury (tier 1)
        merritt (tier 1)
        ... more to come
        
Phase 3 - Deploy
    2 phases of testing
        staging - series of automated and content tests, iterative process
        issues to consider: hardware, infrastructure, maintenance, administration, etc.
    
Phase 4 - Operate
    announce
    ongoing operations
    participate in MN forums

Typical barriers
    during development - establish secure SSL environment, and providing package ORE maps
    design issues - immutability & versioning, logging (required at tier 1 (and up))
    
Explain logging issue: in order to become a MN, required to log all downloads of data/metadata.  The CNs provide an aggregated log, since a single MN may not have accurate usage stats (due to multiple copies of a dataset)

Q: are there infrastructure requirements, for an institution, for example
A: run a server publicly visible on the internet, organizationally support operating as a MN, for a significant period of time.

Q: as a prospective MN, we don't usually provide our users. Everyone gets a customized view of their data.  (This is Tracy from MPC)
A: some repositories can combine data and provide data subsetting tools to simplify the data access; difficulty with reproducibility with custom data delivery (i.e. very complex subsetting), investigating options to ensure reproducibility
considering suppoting registration of advanced services that might provide subsetting service.

Possible solution: set up a metadata front-end with a few fixed data sets and then a link pointing to active subsetting for our archive.

Planning to do the MN as the enitre MPC. We provide identifiers for each extract that a person creates.

We archive the census.
We capture a dataset and a query and that would reproducibly define the customized-data set.

Q: Would it solve the problem if it was "append-only".

(to ask Tracy later - do they have a date/time stamp on your records)

Laura: Documentation and Communications

Communications channels
    MNF
    IRC
    Redmine

ask.dataone.org

I asked a question on ask. It got answered, but the answer was wrong.

Questions on Documentation: What would have helped you?

- Put all the communication channels on the ext web page.

-  A narea that provides guidance and commentary on which technology stacks to use. Tradeoffs on advantages and disadvantage

- Need a link to the flowchart from the web-site

- have a kit or pre-populated presentation on how to communicate issues and progress to your institution.

- The Roadmap is useful. SEAD used checkmarks to show progress.

What else in the packet?
A: Definitions of various components

It would be nice to have a primer.

From a library perspective: I often used terminology that makes sense to me although it may not make snese to folks in other fields/disciplines.

Searchable system of member nodes. How to find member-nodes that are most like me.
similar in what ways?
    content
    SW implementation
    
Provide a template to help frame the discussion.

-Identify the types of repositories and how they address the stumbling blocks might help categorize MNs 

Q: New questions needed for ask.dataone.org
<offline>

Detailed questions

link to development test services

interpretation of tests in test services

proper link to understand requirements

Examples would have helped

also work with science end-users

Soren: We have comleted an implementation that passes integration tests, but our packaging did not maximize the value of the data for ITK tools.

Ryan: I would like to have a "preview mode" where I could put in my site URL and then see how it would look in ONEMercury.

J

John: discussing DataONE and MN added value

How can DAtaONE help amplify the science impact of the dta archives represented by the MNs?
    known - resilient access, persistence, single interface (may or may not be preferred
    other areas for discussion
    
What can MNs and DataONE do to augment synergistic opportunities?
    areas of opportunity
    identify ripe, low-hanging fruit
    principal challenges
    

How to find and assist science users who want to use multiple MNs?
    What is value to science users beyond direct access to individual archives
    How to enable value w/in DataONE
    What does DataONE need to do to make this happen?
    
Q: access control, what does DataONE require for access control for tier 2?  
A: what does data owner want in terms of data access/authorization?
A: current authentication system based on CILogon, don't support OpenID except for Google (i.e. we accept whatever CILogon accepts)
There are other authentication systems that could work - need to discuss within the federation

Q: is authentication mostly for logging?
A: yes, sometimes the funder requires logging; some PIs need to know who is using their data

How do we enable scientific use of more than one MNs datasets?

Inna: Improve what search results look like, an abstract is ok for text, but need more (perhaps visualization) or more descriptive summary for data
Data browsing at SNS (selected thumbnails of data visualization) - worked well, but is only one application

NCEAS - featured dataset, maybe something like a featured workflow, or something
MN description is currently a PDF file, maybe a more visually attractive format would be helpful 
Currently working on dynamic system: list of current MNs, real-time statistics, map of where they are, straightforward way of knowing what data/services are available, pull out temporal/spatial extent of MN holdings (i.e. heat map), number of holdings, current status (is it down?), which tier it operates at, 

*******************
Monday summary report out:

additional content to this epad is welcome, but please mail Matt, Laura, John so that we do not miss it.

Q's from Monday summary

Cost? - yes weheared that suggestion.

Is Road Map online?
Yes at <>

Q: was there discussion about the tiers?
A: it was described but the   questions did not focus on that.

Q: What are the existing SW stack?
A: this was answered. See slides. Summary:
    Metacat
    Generic MN
    Dryad
    Mercury
    Merritt
    --- more coming
    
    Metacat and GMN can support all nodes
    others support D1
    
    A:  (inna) also, SEAD uses Data Conservancy code

Q: But is there just a package that you just install. (Steve Richard) 

