
Welcome to EtherPad!

This pad text is synchronized as you type, so that everyone viewing this page sees the same text.  This allows you to collaborate seamlessly on documents!

NACP West Coast Synthesis telecon #1
Attending: Simone Alin, Burke Hales, Laurie Juranek, Uwe Send, Heather Benway, Samantha Siedlecki, Raphe Kudela, Todd Martz, Ann Russell, Peter Griffith, Mati Kahru

Simone: Background on coastal synthesis activities to date... (see PDF if you missed the telecon)

sub-region breakdowns: 
1. GOA - Vancouver Island -> north
2. N. CA current -- Cape Mendocino to N. Vancouver Island
3. S. CA current
4. Central American Isthmus

process groups:
water column metabolism
sediment diagenisis/burial
cross-shelf transport
terrestrial input
air-sea exchange

Volunteers for region/process lead?

Timeline?
meet in subgroups prior to 2012 OCB (late 2011, early 2012)
2012 OCB -- assembled products presented
written products -- special journal issue (6 months after 2012 OCB)?

Data support (Griffith): funding secured for data manager position, position description -- should have someone by October
Do we need leaders for process groups? Or self-organizining? Focus on region leads.

Martz: 1.Coherent methods across subregions? 2.What to do about data gaps?
1. Depends on region and data availability, what is most appropriate; 2)Not proposing new data collection, but identifying what is needed to complete budget could be a good outcome

Send: Manpower? Who has what expertise? Region leaders will have to seek out additional help, likely. Identify who could contribute to processes within each region?
Moorings could contribute to metabolism, cross-shelf transport, air-sea exchange, but not terrestrial/sediment

Next step: subregion telecons? Others to include?

I thought that was a good place to end things.  Push to define the regional sub-groups, and then they will self-organize more effectively.

NACP West coast telecon #2
Attending: Jeremy Mathis, Wiley Evans, Ruben Lara Lara, Martin Hernandez, Gilberto Gaxiola, Laurie Juranek, Anita Leinweber, Burke, Craig Carlson, Zongyang?, Richard Feely, Mark Ohman, Andrew Dickson, Brian Bergamaschi, John Largier

Not me.  Maybe one of the UCLA guys? Probably - hope I got the name right.  This tool is handy...
<Simone's excellent summary of OCB coastal synthesis to date>
Mathis: timeline for publications? 3-6 months after OCB, set by region leaders...Papers by region/subregion, potentially overarching regional process-level papers
Ohman: people with process level expertise need to work across subregions for intercomparisons
subregional telecon, then process level cross-region telecons? Self-assemble subregions, then see what process-level expertise is within/across regions.
Goal not necessarily to resolve everything, but also to identify gaps in knowledge
Feely: overview summary paper for west coast? Likely. Can also have sub-sub regional papers, depending on initiative of members...
Mathis: GOA should be it's own, Mathis and Evans can co-lead this effort.
N. CA- Siedlecki and Alin can co-lead.
Alin to distibute list of participants/potential participants

Ohman: can contribute to water column metabolism (no regional affiliation)
Carlson: can contribute to S. CA, need people in the CCE group for this effort (Martz, Send..)
Largier: where do boxes begin and end? 
Burke: 400 km offshore to head of tide - areas that are not generally included in open ocean/global and terrestrial budgets
Ohman: 300 km  - length scale where new production balances export production (Plattner et al. GRL paper 2005)
Bergamaschi: takes care of the estuarine (volunteered by Burke)
Largier: coastal transport for central region
Bergamschi: what is the role of  the "leader"
Alin: lead of manuscript, senior cat herder, stay in touch with other regional leaders for intercomparisons
Burke: should have ~4 regional papers, potentially process level cross-region papers
Martin and Gaxiola: Baja, central isthmus, but don't have data to cover all desired processes (NCP)
Ohman: who associates with process level topics? Alin will assemble and distribute
Next steps: subregional telecons, flesh out expertise, where are cross-subregion discussions needed.
Feely: overview of whole west coast region for certain processes (air-sea flux) - strategy for publishing all papers in a coherent way (e.g., JGR?)

