DUG Call Apr 25 2011
Conference Dial-in Number: (712) 775-7100
Participant Access Code: 128383#

Minutes from last meeting: https://docs.dataone.org/member-area/planning-for-dug/dug-call-minutes/24Mar2011_DUG_Minutes.docx/view

Agenda:
1) Invitation process: Current DUG, targeted future members, ESIP solicitation 
2) Review of draft agenda (informed by S&G working group): https://docs.dataone.org/member-area/planning-for-dug/dug-2011-meeting-planning-folder/22Apr2011_DRAFT_DUG_Agenda.docx/view
3) Actions and next steps
4) AOB

1) Invitation process:
Current DUG (28)

Targeted Future DUG (31)
List created by Bob and Richard available in googledocs.
Invitation for membership should be extended to the targeted list but explain that space is limited and so not all can attend.
Richard and Bob to prioritize the list, potentially removing 'competitors' from other DataNets. Asking them to identify science investigators form within their host institution that might also seek to be a member of the DUG.

ESIP soliciation (??)
The ESIP email invitaiton went out to ESIP members today (Apr 25).  Proposed text for the DataONE ESIP invitation to be sent out asap:

Dear ESIP partners
DataONE will be holding its annual DataONE Users Group meeting in advance of the ESIP Summer meeting on Monday and Tuesday, July 11th-12th at the Hotel La Fonda, Santa Fe, New Mexico.  This is the same meeting location as the ESIP Summer Meeting.
On Monday July 11th we will be holding a series of discussions and presentations designed to inform the community about the objectives, accomplishments and planned activities of DataONE.  These will include coverage of our public release planned for late 2011, our education and outreach activities and resources for science investigators.  On the morning of Tuesday July 12th we will hold a business meeting of the DataONE Users Group and ESIP members wishing to participate more fully in DataONE are invited to join.
If you plan to attend the ESIP Summer meeting please consider attending our events to learn more about DataONE and how you might engage with our organisation as an individual or a 'Member Node'.  While we are unable to provide additional accomodation or travel support for ESIP members, breakfast, snacks and lunch will be provided for all participants.  Space is limited so please register your intent to attend this free session.
To find out more about DataONE and the DataONE Users Group please visit: www.dataone.org and www.dataone.org/content/dataone-users-group respectively.


2) Meeting Agenda
Communication with ESIP and the ESIP invitation suggest that activities will begin in the afternoon on Tuesday July 12th


3) Actions and Next Steps
Bob and Richard to prioritize list - high, medium, low
Amber to prepare email drafts for editing by group
Bob to forward list of 'tool' invitees once received on Thursday
All emails to be sent out by the end of the week
Bob and Richard to identify their priorities for the 2nd day agenda


4) AOB
Next call scheduled for Monday 16th May @ 2 PT / 3 MT / 4 CT / 5 ET



