Member Node Wranglers 
    Fridays at 10:00 am Alaska
                    11:00 am Pacific
                    12:00 noon Mountain
                    1:00 pm Central
                    2:00 pm Eastern

https://www1.gotomeeting.com/join/430697153

9 May 2014
                                                                           
Attending:  Laura, Bruce, Amber

Regrets:  Rebecca, 

Agenda: 

        1. High profile issues (or current items of interest)
        
                CN fix (tidy process)?  not finished yet (we think)
                
                MN Dashboard 
                MN information (description) displayed on dashboard comes from the MN Node Doc; eBird, LTER, and TFRI needed work, eBird and TFRI have made their changes to Node Doc
                
                Status on OPeNDAP / DSpace subcontracts - DSpace moving ahead with implementation; OPeNDAP just provided SOW for their implementation (a little more complicated than DSpace with incompatibilities between DAP and DataONE), won't be able to complete full implementation this PY but will be able to prototype
                DSpace users group meeting at Open Repositories (Helsinki meeting) - question - is Ryan Scherle attending this UG mtg??  He will be there...
                
(Hold off on this until everyone present)
                Purpose of MN Description Document (past and future) - past: identify data holdings (type, volume, etc.), operations, to aid in MN development.  future: ???  
        
        Let's try to have a f2f MNW meeting at the AHM next week, talking about what we want to accomplish in 3 months, MNDD,  -- maybe first half of morning on Thursday (block 7 or 8)
        Dashboard (with Skye)
        
        1.5   Current MNs

                
        2. Status of upcoming MNs
    
     * Y5Q4
       * LTER-Europe  (3232) - News item approved; hold off until CN fix completed.
       * EDAC (3221) -  Soren says EDAC is ready to go; hold off until CN fix completed.  
       * DFC (3532) -  Chris has been working with Lisa Stillwell and Mary Whitton answering questions
       * MPC (3708) - registering in sandbox
       * ORNL MNs (RGD (4248) and EDORA (4247)) - moved to "testing", MNDDs/logo for EDORA received from Bob and he's working on RGD's; Jim is registering both in staging
       * GLEON (3422) - a couple datasets out there in their sandbox MN; next steps: convince folks to contribute their data
       * PPBio  (3748) -  Email out to Debora/Matt/Ben for update
       * NKN (3238) - Ed says they are up and running in sandbox. He had some questions we addressed at the MNF last week.
       * SAEON (3205) - We are planning to work with Alex to upgrade their metacat, awaiting response from them re: when in May will work for them.

    Future
       * TERN Australia (4286): Meeting with Alison at AHM to work on education/outreach items (draft MOU scope item C);   Hope to meet with Nikki Thurgate when she's in the states, perhaps around DUG; working on scope items A and B in particular, meeting again in June.
       * IARC  (International Arctic Research Center) (4700) - met with Jim Long  4/10/14.  They currently run GeoNetwork, would like to be a fully  functional MN, can start small (expose metadata only) and work from there.  Jim is working on a proposal (with Bruce) to get some additional funding for a more general GeoNetwork-based Member Node  
       * EU BON -- Looking to deploy a test MN in the next 6-9 months.  Bruce to get back with Hannu to revisit this plan. 

        3. Old action items
             MN Documentation - MN Deployment and MN Ongoing Operations - holding
             
        4. Not-high profile issues
     * Redmine ticket generator - we think we've got a comprehensive list, hope to apply to a couple upcoming MNs to see how it works.
       
        5. Around the room
            Bruce:  nope
            Amber:  nothing, but have a question about timing (when tidy process completes, lots of things happening (EDAC, LTER-Europe, dashboard deploy, etc.) - when do we expect tidy to be complete?
            Dave:  nearly done - 2 MNs still outstanding which require assistance from the MN:
     *  TFRI (server certs issued by Taiwan govt, which is not recognized by DataONE, can be remedied)
     *  eBird - cert issue which prevents completion of tidy process, need assistance from eBird
            Laura: see above  :)

