NACP Synthesis Teleconference 
July 21, 2011

Toll Free Number:  866-703-9626 
Pass Code:  767574 

Attending:  Kevin Schaefer, , Debbie Huntzinger, Mac Post, Yaxing Wei, Dan Ricciuto, Thomas Lauvaux, Andrew Richardson,

Not able to attend:  Ken Davis, Andy Jacobson, Andrew Schuh, , Steve Wofsy wofsy@fas.harvard.edu, Paula Coble, Simone Alin, Dan Hayes,  Tony King, Jeremy Mathis, Werner Kurz, Stephen Ogle, Anna Michalak, Peter Thornton, 
Joanne Nightingale, Eric Kasischke, Alan Barr, Scott Denning

Agenda
MCI - Ken Davis, Stephen Ogle, Thomas Lauvaux, and Andrew Schuh
Disturbance - Eric
Non-CO2 GHG -  Steve Wofsy
Coastal Synthesis - Jeremy and Paula



1.  Site Synthesis - Kevin, Andrew, and Dan 

From Ken Davis:
Reichstein et al are trying to initiate a statistical flux model (empirical fits to flux tower data) comparison activity.  Emerging from Baldocchi's meeting in Berkeley in June.

Kevin is doing an upscaling with Evaporative Fraction

Ag paper was rejected, will be re-worked and resubmitted, perhaps to another journal
Andrew's phenology paper is in review
Alan's work:  paper by July, with some new U-star corrections
Dan:  has posted the gap-filled met data paper and will now send an announcement
Kevin:  GPP paper is in the works
Kevin: Model survey paper in process
Stoy's spectral analysis:  in process
Alok Sahoo:  Energy balance paper from sites in S. and N. America is in process


5.  Regional synthesis - Debbie
Huntzinger et al. (North American Carbon Project (NACP) Regional Interim Synthesis: Terrestrial Biospheric Model Intercomparison) was submitted to Biogeosciences about a month ago. Waiting for the quick review from editor. Not yet posted to dicussions page. Hopefully soon.

Hayes et al. submitted FastTrack paper to Global Change Biology.

Huntzinger et al. working on an extension of the NACP Regional Syn work comparing runoff estimates from TBMs. Working with Marcia Branstetter to run runoff estimates through RTM/CLM. Compare discharge in major river basins to observations.

Debbie evaluating runoff / discharge from models and compare to observed discharge


7.  RECAPP - Mac 
processing TRENDY results to include in NA analysis; also merging in FastTrack
zero order draft in a few weeks

8.  MsTMIP - Debbie
Telecon with all modeling groups; reviewed protocol and provided ftp URL for input data
Workshop in October 13-14 in Ames, CA; expected that some similations done then, completed in January
Two new additions to MsTMIP Team:  Christopher Schwalm (move to NAU) and Shishi Liu


9. NASA  TE Activities -- from Ken Davis

NASA TE wants to do a terrestrial upscaling synthesis / methods assessment.  I volunteer ChEAS, but we haven't pushed anything yet.   Peter Thornton was also interested, but in Alaska.  A next synthesis?

10.Other topics?

