
Present: Bertram, Paolo, Shawn


selling points for the 
1. D-OPM model + (discuss draft, solicit input)
-- includes "mini-ontology" of depends-on relations
2. prov. repository + (request to host @ DataONE)
3. prov. toolkit (postdoc w/ CCIT help)

(in order of ambition/timeline)

1: solicit feedback, get buy-in from WG participants
2: get buy-in from DataONE leadership

- lower barrier of entry to new players in the e-science / workflow space
- Paolo makes an adventurous parallel with Hadoop in the MapReduce impl space

[Jacek? Wf-land + Trace-land aligned in viz tool being designed / implementation by M.sc. student]

Shawn: broad the scope, to make sure the idea appeals beyond the workflow community -- for example R. 
make it more appealing to DataONE even in the absence of workflows.

selling point for having common model: 
- enable people who are not stakeholders in any of the workflow systems to write tools against the common model/repo.

- at the AHM we need to collect input / feedback / buy-in
wearing the DataONE hat, members have an opportunity to influence an upcoming common model and provenance management system for workflow-based provenance

- play the "provenance-rich publication" card / executable papers

* Draft Invite:
The DataONE ProvenanceWG is continuing the development of a provenance model and standard to facilitate ...
 ... based on OPM ... extend for scientific workflows and related technologies (such as R)
 Vision: develop data model and provenance management architecture that makes it simple for groups that have prov generating systems to operate and interoperate.
 Prov Mgmt infrastucture on top of which addtl functionality can be built easily,
 3rd parties can build on this easily 
 
 Scope: provenance-generating scientific workflow systems (Galaxy, Kepler, Pegasus, Taverna, Vistrails, ...) and related systems and tools (R, BioPerl, BioPython,...)
 
 First phase: 
 -- D-OPM draft 0.1 (coming out of initial ProvWG meetings and DToL, GoldenTrail summer projects)
 
 Agenda point: solicit feedback and invite active involvement on D-OPM v1.0 
 
 Second phase: 
- development of provenance toolkit: 
- based on D-OPM model
- includes repository (-ies) hosted by DataONE
- querying and visualization tools


-- infrastructure: reference implementation of a D-OPM schema
-- 


ProvWG participant expectations and role:
- monthly telecons: updates on development efforts (from ProvWG postdoc, CCIT?), 
- 
- 

ProvWG will have:
- 1 postdoc to develop infrastructure
- will work with your folks 

Questions:
-- link to new EVA group
 
-- Bring together a community to define and build common and useful/relevant provenance tools to build a larger community of provenance users
  -- Instead of yet another provenance model
  -- Bring into the fold more widely used systems (like R) as well as possibly data providers (e.g., for EML metadata of protocols/methods)
  -- Address the gap of provenance models but with a lack of useful tools to exploit the numerous provenance models ... examples of tools would be repository infrastructures, query languages/implementations, import/export, visualization and browsing, and others tbd by the group (e.g., for assessing data quality, for managing experiments, for "smart" papers, etc.)
  



Invitees:
Bertram Ludaescher (UCD)
Paolo Missier (Newcastle) 
Shawn Bowers (Gonzaga) 

Duncan Temple Lang (UCD, R & provenance) new invitee
Ewa Deelman (USC, PEGASUS) ProvWG member
Ilkay Altintas (SDSC, BIOKEPLER) ProvWG member
James Taylor (Emory, Atlanta, GALAXY) new invitee
Juliana Freire (NYU Poly, VISTRAILS) ProvWG, Claudio Silva,  (Juliana sent David Koop last year)
Khalid Belhajjame (U Manchester, TAVERNA) new invitee
Michael Agun (Gonzaga) -- Summer Intern (would miss classes, can maybe make "poster day"?)
Saumen Dey (UCD) -- Summer Intern and ProvWG member
Tim McPhillips (UCD, RESTFLOW) new invitee 

Yogesh Simmhan (USC, KARMA, OPM) ProvWG member, focus now is cloud

? James Cheney (Edinburgh): talk with him, see whether he is interested

(2 out of 3?)
Leon Osterweil (UMass) -- G, N (Harvard ecology/provenance use case!?)
Barbara Lerner, (Mt. Holyoke College, http://www.mtholyoke.edu/~blerner/), development of persistence technology
http://www.mtholyoke.edu/~blerner/DataProvenance/
Lori Clark (UMass) -- G, N? 


? Jim Myers (RPI) -- G, N?

John Kunze WG interaction (data-cite)
Bob Cook WG interaction (EVA)

? Carole et al (BioVeL - Biodiversity Virtual e-Laboratory (BIOVEL))
? Dave De Roure
? Margo Seltzer

? Deborah McGuiness (Semantic WG, PML)

Next Actions:
Bertram to email Rebecca (cc: Bill) names; issue with 3 UMass
Draft invitation (Bertram)
Model (Paolo)

