Notes for Provenance paper meeting (Sep 1 at 14:00 PST)

Some papers shared by Matt (and a few more) are in a private Mendeley group (allows pdf sharing): http://www.mendeley.com/groups/1377483/workflow-review-paper/

Some relevant papers that have already covered this topic (from Matt):

 For background, there have been related perspective pieces already published.  See for example:

Accessible Reproducible Research. Jill P. Mesirov Science 22 January 2010:  Vol. 327 no. 5964 pp. 415-416  DOI: 10.1126/science.1179653
There's also the executable papers effort that happened this year (http://www.executablepapers.com/). We should figure out what we want to say that is different from the existing pieces.

And here's another one that is of much relevance, defining a Reproducible Research Standard (RRS): http://www.stanford.edu/~vcs/papers/LFRSR12012008.pdf
The published version of that whitepaper is here: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2009.19


Meeting on 09/01 @ 1400
--------------------------------------

Some thoughts on what's different in this effort compared to the other similar reviews (above):
Most of these articles call for wfs to be embedded in a paper (e.g. executible papers). Little mention is made of including them as separate entities that are themselves products worth sharing. 
The Ecology and Evolution crowd is particularly unaware of the utility of wfs (We could potentially write this in an ecological venue but most are closed-access).


Bertram/Duncan: doc book package.
DataONE R demo: indirect identifiers makes the script portable.

Would want to discuss both SW systems and traditional analysis systems that can be considered workflows too (e.g., R)

RSS

Multiple levels of granularity
    -- black box: data in, process, data out
    -- more detail: data in, process 1.. n; data out

Discuss taxonomy or levels of hierarchy in granularity. Adding additional details in the provenance hierarchy enables a wider community to participate.

Incentives; what do people get (in addition to better science reproducibility)
   -- better citations (open access papers get cited more)
   -- where is the tradeoff in investment (better preservation versus more research)?
   -- 

GitHub analogy; great community forming; but one in a series (CVS, SVN, Hg, Git, etc), but migration must be continuous.

Analogy with dat aarchiving/migration/bitrot issues; hard enough with data, much harder with process/algorithm;

Practicing scientists are able to follow the statistical algorithm but not always the implementation. 

Motivations for paper:
    -- audience -- spread word to audience that hasn't heard, awareness of workflow efforts
        -- why would people
    -- arguments about data; excitement about sharing data; white's project; 
    
 Awareness of wf systems is much more pevalent among molecular biologists since they have been forced to interact with Genbank for a good period of time. With other fields this is all very new.
    
Target audiences:
    Ecologists
    Evolutionary bio
    ...
    
Need to choose an appropriate journal; candidates (goal to target open access journal?):
   PLOSBio (perspectives)
   PLOSCompBio
   Frontiers in E & E (review) http://www.frontiersinecology.org/
   Ecological Informatics (too techy, not open -- Elsevier)
   TREE
   AREES
   BioScience
   Maybe a computational journal?
       Ecological Modelling (Elsevier)?
       Ecological Applications
       
  
  ------------------------  ------------------------  ------------------------  ------------------------  ------------------------  ------------------------  ------------------------
  
  # Notes for meeting on 09/07

Paper Outline & Focus
Larger goal: Introduce the concept of workflows to practicing scientists (i.e. people who should be using/reusing workflows but aren't for various reasons).
Audience: The broader scientific community but with a focus (examples and use cases) from the eco/evo community. Address the point that molecular folks have been forced to acknowledge and use wfs since the establishment of NIH mandates.workflows provide a way to interact with public domain data that are increasingly being made available (e.g. dryad).

Topics: 
Intro to open-science 
 - Brief discussion re: greater acceptance 
What are workflows?
 - Formal workflow systems
 - Ad-hoc workflow systems (more common)
 - Scripting systems as wfs (e.g., R, Python, Perl)
 
workflows capture complete scholarship (papers just share the end result) of how to genera 

Why workflow sharing is not all that similar to data sharing
 - Constant need to migrate
 - Process/algorithms are much harder to archive and reproduce than data.
   - So what level of granularity should we document?
                - Black box approach (much easier, harder to reproduce). examples in literature? or use cases where documented algorithms would be useful.
            - Fine grained approach (greater reuse but harder to document)

Reproducible Research System (RRS) = Reproducible Research Environment (RRE) +  Reproducible Research Publisher (RRP). The idea of the executible paper.

Why aren't workflow systems more widely discussed, shared and reused?
 - Incentives to share
                 - Better citations (evidence is inconclusive)
                -  Reusability of wf components that perform common tasks leads.
 - Disincentives to sharing

Recommendations
Need for wfs to gain interactivity of R, R to gain provenance etc from wfs

Journals to target
To stay in the spirit of the article (and open science in general) we should publish someplace that permits open access.

If the two of you are also attending the DataONE all hands meeting in October, maybe we can have a draft that we can discuss in person at that time?


  

