
User Tasks for Usability subtasks:
Scientists
1. Find a data set that they have deposited or that someone else has deposited.
2. Generate a well formatted citation for a dataset
3. Control access to their own data (options for who can use it/see it;  how long an embargo, etc.) (if possible test different ages/stage of  careers)
4. Easily find terms and conditions for use of that dataset; and allow follow-up
5. Download a data set into common formats (excel, R, etc.)
6.  Find teaching/training materials that  I could incorporate into my  course (data lifecylce, commonly used metadata standards, workflows, etc.)
7. Tasks/use scenarios vary based on subject discipline of researcher, e.g. human subjects for social science researchers and medical),    Use tasks but also different users--task list may be static, but   different users by discipline, workplace, age/point in your career

8. being able to filter by type of data easily, geographic scope, time period
9. ability to easily find software requirements needed to view/analyze the data
10. being able to reach contact/owner of the data; promoting collaboration and sharing, building sense of community and 
10a. trust in the quality of the data and that the system is secure, reliable, long term, safe
11. being able to get help about system
12.  know enough about the dataset/data context from the descriptive summary  so they can determine if this is relevant (in metadata, but also  abstract description, also links to papers, further reports)
13.  If I want to deposit data, how does DataONE lead me through the process  of depositing data to a member node (assuming I don't know about the  member nodes)?
14.  See tools when I need them, at the point in my workflow when it makes  sense (not every task, but common tasks like submission, metadata,  downloading)
15. Feedback/progress bars
16.  Addressing motivational issues--what's in this for me, why should I  deposit data, no cost, citations, etc. Overcoming barriers. This could  be a website task, value proposition of dataONE (should be immediate and  prominently displayed)
17.  Ability to state returns for reuse of your data; make it clear what is  the function/rules of a member node and what is DataONE--clarifying  member node terms of use and how a member node differs from "dataONE"
18. Accomodations for institutional requirements (customizable like the DMP tool)
19.  Setting up an account, capture profile information  that will help me,  ownership properties, usage statistics  (Probably for future testing,  won't be available for a while).

Usability issues for data manager

1. Uploading data
Upload data in a consistent format (i.e. CSV, any standardized format in a discipline)
Upload multiple data at a same time
Upload metadata along with the original data sets
Provide any relevant procedure to upload data
Allow data managers to upload incremental data sets

2. Modifying data
Allow data managers to control/maintain the data sets they uploaded

3. Locating data
Import data citation information in different citation formats
Provide some terms and conditions (i.e. restrictions)
Provide metadata for a group of related files
Locate relevent data for their own scientists
- Provide instructions about how to search for particular data sets
- Provide search options for relevant studies (Associated/Related DataBase)
Extract data in different formats from the database


