WebSite Revision Discussion
Oct 3rd 2011 @ 10 PT / 11 MT

Attending: Amber, Rebecca, Laura, Grace, Chris

Posters to be printed at end of week:
Home
About>DataONE Organization
EVA page
Products>BP landing
ST>Vistrails
Education>Training activities

Discussion:
Timing: Get images etc to LA and CA asap.  Editing can continue until Thursday night.  Focus on pages for printing.

Front Page
   Site Search - will be there today.
   Twitter feed - holding spot for CCIT? Replace with CCIT image (e.g. MN map) with word incidating "Access ONEMercury" or some such?  Or 'Coming soon' until release.  AMBER to create.  Have it link to a page 'About ONEMercury'?  LA and RK to figure out where it will link.  Dimensions? 360w x 290h px (no white space) Include white space on LHS of image.
   Rotating picture panel - Standardized picture size or framed space? 290h x 600w
   Alignment - Align DataONE Logo with picture panel
   Too many fonts - stick within san serif
   Put dots back
   Black panel for picture label  - increase transparency?  reduce words?
   Links change to bold - this makes things jump.  Change method of roll over
   Social media icons smaller?  Also, align with line and/or word above
   Speed of scrolling news too slow?
   Latest News - links to news page?
   Background color - can it be less dark?
   Footer font - smaller?
   Tab Info - give logo transparent background and make DataONE one work (as in current website)
   Picture panel - takes you to relevant content as opposed to a news item
   8pt buffers throughout

General Content page information
Landing page - need to have one?  if so, need to have content. No landing page - make ONEMercury page have content.
Breadcrumbs - don't always followONEMercury comes out form under Products.
ITK comes out from under Data
ONEMercury shouldn't be two words
All pages should have LHS navigation
Drop down slignment - should align. style similar to aekos. org.au but use same size tabs 


About >DataONE Organization
Org Chart -  color changes to pums and teals, include names, change one of the WG names - Rebecca to send. Org chart elements to be links.
"THE Organization" - drop "the"
CCIT - spell out
About DataONE - reduce to About so it matches boxes

Working Groups>EVA
Amber to send images and credits for EVA page.  Amber to edit pages.

Best Practices
Tags correction - desribe and Describe
More 'Products Links' to top and reduce to 'Products'
Order of LHS elements: Products>Featured>Tags>FIF
Tag cloud - include color?

ST>Vistrails
Items to go after colons
Tags to be horizontal
If additional infor box is filled, that would start below subhead and not to right of colon (the one exception)
'Contributor' to be removed and used for behind the scenes stuff only








